# OGF DFDL Working Group - ISO Process Call Notes 

### IPR statement
"I acknowledge that participation in this meeting is subject to the OGF Intellectual Property Policy"

### Action 325 - Submit OGF DFDL 1.0 to ISO for adoption as an ISO standard

|    325     | Submit OGF DFDL 1.0 to ISO for adoption as an ISO standard (Mike, Steve) |
| ---------- | --- |
| 2021-11-11 | Alan & Wolfgang attended the call. OGF is looking to re-home its successful standards to more relevant organisations. The proposal is that DFDL moves to ISO.  OGF has well-established connections with ISO, and Wolfgang is an attendee at working group meetings. There is a specific ISO process that lets them adopt a public, freely available standard whilst maintaining its public, free status. In contrast to ISO-owned standards which are chargeable. The public, free status continues to apply to ongoing revisions. DFDL feels like a good fit for ISO, noted that DFDL schemas exist for ISO 8583 and EDIFACT.  There is no need initially to change DFDL to use ISO templates, this can happen later. Noted that this is not a process for dumping old standards onto ISO, it applies to standards with an active community. The end result is that DFDL continues to evolve and be freely available but there are revisions that are effectively 'blessed' by ISO. An example of this in practice is Open Virtualization Format Specification from DMTF.  Adoption of a standard by ISO is ultimately determined by national body votes. Next steps: OGF will write to ISO-IEC JST1 with the proposal. DFDL WG will reach out to the chair of SC38 WG5 which is considered the most likely place DFDL will end up in ISO. The WG5 chair is Fernando Gebara Filho. DFDL WG to consider attending the appropriate ISO meetings. Useful links: ISO Process: https://www.iec.ch/members_experts/refdocs/iec/Consolidated_JTC1_Supplement_2020_publication.pdf, DMTF ANSI/ISO adoptions: https://www.dmtf.org/about/register/apresources. 
| 2022-02-24 | OGF are still working on the first step of the process, the application for OGF becoming a PAS submitter. They expect to submit the application letter begin of March. Once OGF will be a recognised PAS submitter there will be an assigned mentor who will guide through the next steps which mostly will have to be taken by the DFDL WG. Wolfgang sent an email with questions that the WG need to answer. Questions discussed and answers sent back to Wolfgang. 
| 2022-04-07 | Steve to chase OGF for latest position. 
| 2022-07-14 | From Wolfgang: "The process was a bit slower than foreseen, mostly because of holiday absence both on side the of OGF and JTC1. Regarding the application letter I am waiting for the confirmation from our guide that the last  version we have sent him on Monday is well suited for our official application as PAS submitter. If we have his confirmation OGF will officially send the application to JTC1. Thereafter it will subject to a voting of the national bodies which my take additional one or two months." Meantime in parallel Steve will contact the WG5 chair.
| 2022-08-11 | ISO have received the application from OGF for it to be allowed to be a PAS submitter. Steve has contacted the WG5 chair who is now following progress.
| 2022-10-06 | Application still in ISO pipeline. 
| 2022-11-03 | Expecting to hear by next WG call. 
| 2022-12-01 | Not heard anything yet. Steve to send chaser.
| 2023-01-05 | OGF accepted as a PAS submitter. Joined on the call by Alan Sill & Wolfgang Ziegler. Alan suggested DFDL WG joined the SC38 WG5 calls, introduced DFDL 1.0 to the group, and followed its suggestions as to how to proceed. Steve to approach WG5 chair Fernando Gebara Filho. Wolfgang reminded us that adoption of DFDL would be by national body vote, so making relevant national bodies like ANSI & BSI aware might be useful. Also need to make sure there is a free copy of the standard publicly available. Noted that there is already a good synergy with ISO standards because DFDL schemas exist for ISO standards EDIFACT and ISO8583.
| 2023-01-19 | The next SC38 Plenary Meeting is in Brisbane, AU from Feb 13 to 17, with remote access. On Thursday Feb 16, WG5 will meet to discuss the activities for the following months. Fernando suggested that we join the Zoom call. Steve to email Fernando nearer the time.
| 2023-02-02 | Steve has emailed Fernando. Suggest cancelling next DFDL WG call as it also on Feb 16th.
| 2023-03-02 | The anticipated WG5 call didn't happen, as we found out that the decision to adopt is taken at a higher level. Wolfgang has been in discussion with ISO and we have received documents including SD9 which explain next steps. Awaiting document templates before proceeding further. Agreed to hold separate bi-weekly calls to progress the ISO submission, starting 2023-03-09, so that the regular WG bi-weekly calls are not taken over by this action, Steve to send calendar invite. Mike to create a new folder in the DFDL GitHub repo specifically for the ISO submission.
| 2023-03-09 | First of the calls dedicated to this action. Steve & Alan joined. Next step is for the WG to go through the process documents that have been sent, and assemble the DFDL documents required by the process. WG would prefer to submit the specification in its current OGF format with latest errata, rather than re-formatting to ISO format, but we will keep an open mind on that.
| 2023-03-23 | Steve & Mike joined. Both have looked at the received process documents and examples thereof. The Explanatory Report seems straightfoward enough so Mike will start work on creating one for DFDL. Looking at the example for OpenChain, there are some magic numbers and dates on the first page. **Wolfgang or Alan - can you advise what they should be for DFDL?** The WG would like to submit the current OGF spec in its current format, with the inclusion of the known resolved errata. **Alan - can you point us at the OGF document that explains how to add errata to an existing OGF specification?**  WG will use next call to agree final wording on those errata items.
| 2023-04-20 | Mike has created draft Explanatory Report as pull request https://github.com/OpenGridForum/DFDL/pull/41. This was reviewed by Steve, Mike, Alan, Jens & Wolfgang on the call. Specifically, all TBDs were commented on and resolved where possible.  

